A couple of things that Publishers Weekly likes, and this is just because I don't know if you've seen many of their interviews or not, but they do like to have a brief summary of who your agent is and who your editors are, and I don't know if we have to go through that ad nauseam because you've got so many books, but if you could just give me some sense of
They do like, you know, how you get started, and I dispense with this in two graphs, usually, but they'll always ask for it if I don't have it in there.
Your first book, and I guess when we get to the Halleck book, it is pertinent to how Eisenhower, how you became involved, and I think in that case, that is pertinent, and maybe we could just talk a bit about that.
Well, like most academics, I might
publishing career began with university presses.
And my first book was about Henry Halleck, who was Lincoln's chief of staff.
And LSU Press published that book.
And I doubt that they ran a thousand copies.
It got some reviews and scholarly journals.
And then, like almost any of them, well, anyway.
And then it became a part of the library and a part of bibliography.
But altogether, I think, yeah.
At the outside, it had a thousand reviews.
But one of them was Dwight Eisenhower.
Isn't that something?
Yeah.
It was.
Life-changing for me.
And then he called me, and I went up to Gittesburg to meet him and talk to him about it.
He called you on the phone?
Yeah.
I mean, was it Dwight Eisenhower?
Retired.
Right, but I mean, he called and said, Mr. Ambrose, this was Dwight Eisenhower, something like that?
Yeah.
Did you say, give me a break?
No.
He didn't need to identify himself.
I knew his voice.
I'd seen him on the television.
So I went up to see him, and he... About when was this?
This was in 1963.
And...
we talked about my being one of the editors of his papers and writing his biography.
I was 28 years old.
And he, at the end of the session, he said, well, you must have a lot of questions.
And I said, I certainly do, General, but the overwhelming is curiosity.
Why me?
He said, I read your book on hell.
You really could have knocked me over.
Isn't that something?
And then he went on to explain that he had himself been thinking about writing something about Halleck.
And it came out in an odd way.
When I got the Overlord in command in explaining
In the period before that decision was made, in talking to Ike, Roosevelt had said, listen, you and I know the name of Lincoln Street staff, but very few people in America do.
I don't want that to happen to George Marshall.
He's going to have to have a field command to escape that kind of delirium.
And Ike had thought of writing about Halleck and
bringing the martial angle into it.
And then he said, and then I read your book, and I decided that this is a good book, and I don't need to write about it.
Okay, that sounds nice.
But I would like you to work on my papers and be my biographer.
Did he say this on the phone, or was this the... No, this was... I know you said you went to Gettysburg, but when he called you and invited you... It was at the end of the meeting at Gettysburg.
But he just invited you up to see him, so you really didn't know what you were going up there for?
Oh, no, I knew that I was going up there to talk about this position, which was a bit complex.
Johns Hopkins was publishing.
Johns Hopkins Press was going to publish the Eisenhower Pages, which sit over there on their shelf.
They're now up to something like 15 volumes.
And I wanted to keep an academic connection.
So we worked out a deal, this is what I was talking to him about.
We worked out, and his brother was president of Hopkins, and we worked out a deal that I would be, I would work on the papers, but I would also have an appointment in the history department and teach a course, and then interview the general with the biography as an end result.
So, that was what I fell into in 28, because Black Eisenhower happened to pick up that book.
There's a little kicker to that story.
When May died, I could will the farm at Gettysburg to the National Park Service, but May was to stay in it until her death.
And then when Mamie died, John called me and said, Steve, I'm over at the house, and the kids are here, and we're clearing out things that we want to keep, because it all becomes the property of your National Park Service tomorrow, or whatever the dating was.
And here in Dad's bedside bookshelf is a copy of Palette, marked up.
Do you want it?
And I thought and didn't reply.
And John said, you've got to be quick.
I've got a lot of people to call.
I said, well, John Disney will wear things.
And it's there today.
A little mistake.
Yeah, I don't know.
I mean, I'm glad it's there.
But anyway, that's where it's at.
It's certainly, you think there's some
scholarly.
I think it would be wonderful if you had that book, but that's not the story.
Well, that's too late now, anyway.
Yeah, you talk about epiphanous moments in a career.
It's almost what we were talking about last night, these little incidents, and we're talking about history on a grand scale, his history on an individual's scale of one life.
That phone call, you probably would have spent your career very happily as an academic,
Now, that did change your life dramatically.
Would you agree with that?
Sure, of course.
And perhaps you could just and then follow through.
What happened?
Tell me a little bit about those years you spent with the Eisenhower Project.
Turned in on years.
For me personally and for the country, the goddamn war was on.
And here I was a military historian working with ICE.
and teaching on a college campus.
I was very productive.
I don't know.
I can't even look at this back to figure out how.
It was a wonderful time.
These were Ike's papers that I was working with, and the man himself.
This was only 20 years after the war.
Less than 20, really.
And so I was seeing stuff that nobody else had ever seen.
Marshall to Eisenhower letters.
Eisenhower to Marshall letters.
We had to go through a lot of rigmarole and top secret clearance and had to set up our offices with a big fucking safe that we finally ended up.
We never did block that kind of thing.
This is on Baltimore, I mean?
Yeah.
Yeah, on the Hopkins campus.
And it was a wonderfully exciting time in my scholarly life.
And I know it's a stretch, but we talk about discovery and seeing things for the first time.
You're talking about correspondence and paperwork that no outsider has seen before.
Did you have these mornings, these moments of
Holy shit, you're not looking through.
Oh, yes, very much so, all the time.
Constantly, yeah.
It's a funny thing about the—I don't know if it's funny or not, but anyway, it's—a part of being a scholar is applying the seed of the parents to the seed of care.
And it's a very monk-like existence.
And everything you do is alone.
Everything.
In the scholarship and in the writing of it.
And so it's a very lonely existence.
But it's, most of all, some of the most intense moments of excitement in my life.
The most.
And I lead an active life, and I'm out a lot, and traveled a lot, and involved with things, and an ordinary life in that regard.
And I have a lot of eyes, and some of those happen.
But by far the most exciting moments of my life have come sitting in a research library, like most of all in the library in Alabama, reading other people's mail.
And going, gah!
And very, very occasionally I've been heard to do it out loud in one of those absolutely somber reading rooms where everybody else is reading other people's mail, too.
But you make discoveries that just send you quivering, almost.
I know it's hard, but does anything come to mind?
Can you think of anything?
I'm so sure there are thousands of them.
To try and recall one is hard.
One of the first ones that hit me that way, or one that comes to mind that hit me that way, was the first time I was reading the Eisenhower Markham correspondence in the
fall of 1942 when the question was whether we were going to open a second front or not and at that time in my life I was a socialist in my politics and I was come on
Yeah, I was.
You talk about a 180.
Well, I mean, Christ, I went to the University of Wisconsin.
Or at least I thought I was a socialist.
But anyway, at that time, I had the view.
It was very popular among me.
And this was Wisconsin in those years.
It was the New Left coming on.
It was William A. Williams.
It was very hard not to.
adopt at least some part of a Marxist outlook.
And one part of that was the charge that in World War II, just the basic charge, that the capitalist powers, i.e.
the U.S.
and the U.K., were happily standing aside while the Red Army was being wiped out, and that this was a part of the capitalist conspiracy.
And it simplifies, obviously, very much.
But anyway, that was the general view I had.
And I can remember reading Eisenhower in July, actually, of 42, writing the Marshal and saying, we've got to do everything we can to save this Red Army.
It would be the biggest mistake in all military history.
We let that Army go under it and then do everything to help it.
And then he went on.
That had a really profound effect on that.
If there is a moment in which I could point to where I shed all Marxist orientation or outlook, it was then.
the scholar who works in solitude and silence, and really you have yourself in these archives.
But I think you add the extra dimension is that you also knew Eisenhower as well as you got to know him as well as anyone outside his family.
And over those years, you know, how many scholars have that kind of access?
And I wonder what this regular daily access brought to you to work.
Well, in Ike's case, it was, I mean, I've, and none of the others make the, anything that you've got.
I've known all the presidents now, and have seen them in different situations.
And, starting with Ike.
Yeah.
I took Harry Truman's hand, but I never had a conversation with him.
And then, all the others.
You can't even begin to continue.
A lot of that is the personal contact.
He was so wonderful.
He had the most fabulous ability to concentrate.
He just shut out everything.
He wanted to talk about what I wanted to talk about.
He put his mind fully on all of my questions.
He was never a look at the watch.
straightening of clothes, or calling for a coffee.
I've never known anyone who had that power of concentration to compare with him.
Did he have that quality, obviously, but could you sense, I know being a former naval officer, we say that if you have it, you don't command presence.
If somebody walks in a room,
You feel it.
It's almost like your skin prickles in a way, isn't it?
Absolutely, absolutely.
It's ineffable.
You can't really... Do you feel that in his presence?
Oh, very much so, and I only knew him as an old man.
He would lock his eyes on you guys.
And you knew who the boss was, right?
And you can look at almost any picture of life in World War II with troops, and he's always got that eye contact with the individual.
And it was characteristic of him when he talked to the troops.
He was very different from Bradley, who always wanted to know what the kid's specialty was.
Pat wanted all these girls who were killed so far, and all this tough guy shit.
Ike always, first question, soldier, where are you from?
Look at him straight in the eye.
Oh, yeah.
So, I just, I thought the will of General Eisenhower, he was very good to me, and that has mattered a lot.
And I saw things in him by being with him that, it confirmed what the moral history with others and documenting evidence showed as.
Jesus, this was 20, 25 years after the event.
And I'd get him going on a question on Monty or something that always pissed him on him.
Just that big red would come into his face when he would start talking, and you could see him drain it away.
What a privileged experience this was to really be a witness to this kind of guy.
And he had the greatest concern for people.
And I would go up and spend a day with him in Guittesbury, and I'd have to drive back to Baltimore.
And he was worried about me.
And he would worry about the roads and tell me how to drive them.
And he had made that football a lot.
And so he would tell me about places to eat.
And one day, he said, where are you going to eat?
And I said, well, I'll find a place.
He said, well, I got a warning.
And he named a place on that road.
And he said, I was in there the other morning for breakfast.
And the...
Cook was a young girl who had a very bad cold and a terrible nasal drip, and I was watching her as she was doing my scrambled eggs, tripping into the end.
He says, don't go there.
It's about, what, three hours drive, I guess, probably not.
Not that much.
We used to go to Baltimore and a half.
Yeah, when I was out at Penn State, we used to drive down Baltimore.
Well, Penn State's three hours from anywhere.
Yeah, I know.
That's right.
But the good news is three hours away from the next town.
But from everywhere, though.
But that's right.
It's about three or four hours from Pittsburgh.
It's by so far the most isolated state universities.
Which has its own kind of character.
We've been there for a football game once for the weekend with some lunch.
And we had a wonderful time.
It's great on a football weekend up there.
That's all there is.
That's major stuff.
When it came time, when it came time to write it, writing about Eisenhower,
Having known him so closely, did you bring a kind of baggage to this?
And I don't mean this in any kind of negative way, but I mean... Let me answer that.
I brought to Eisenhower a great love.
To the project now we're talking about.
To the man.
And the project, which was, to me, a part of the man.
I would get so wound up in writing those two volumes.
Whether the presidency or the war, I'd get up at 4 o'clock, I'd just, I'd almost run to the office.
And I was just loving the work so, but it was more important, I was just dying to see what happened next.
We had these thousands of documents that we had made copies of, Maura and I, at Abilene.
where what do you do?
You just keep flipping through stuff, and just mark down.
You don't even bother to read it.
You look at it, and you can tell almost immediately.
You know the process, and so you scribble down and try.
It's instantaneous.
You don't have to read it.
So, I didn't know it was in these documents, and I got them in a line of co-order, and I would get into the middle of a chapter, and I'd have to go to bed, or the kids would come home from school or whatever.
And I'd even go to bed, and I just would dash out of bed in the morning to get out to the documents to find out what happened next.
But in writing about Eisenhower, I was keenly aware of that I needed to be as objective as I could make myself, and that
I had just an awful lot of surprises for almost all leaders in this book.
And the general run of those surprises was always that it came down and Ike had done a good job on this.
It hadn't been given credit for.
So, in writing about Eisenhower, I knew I had to be as critical as I could.
possibly could, and even go beyond what I really thought.
Whenever I thought he made a mistake, because otherwise, all this praise of this great man was, he'd discounted.
So I hit him hard wherever I could.
I hit him really hard on civil rights.
I hit him very hard on his dealings with Joe McCarthy.
I hit him hard on a couple of military decisions.
With Nixon, I had the exact opposite
First of all, I never met Nixon until long afterwards, and then only briefly.
The second, I didn't like Nixon.
I never liked Nixon.
I was a Nixon hater.
So why did you write about him then?
I don't mean to jump forward, but the question makes to be asked then.
Well, let me answer that in a minute.
Okay.
I'll come immediately back to it.
With Nixon, I knew wherever I found something to praise, I was going to really lay it off, because there was going to be so much negative about this guy, and I didn't want to be an Oliver Stone.
It was a plus grade.
It was necessary, and I came to have a very deep admiration for Richard Nixon, which was the biggest surprise of my whole writing career.
I never thought that was going to happen, but it did.
Not like, but admire.
Respect.
Oh, yeah.
When I was doing the author's thing for one of those volumes, Brian Gumbo asked me.
It was cut time, and I knew it, and I was going to have a one sentence answer.
I didn't know what he was going to have.
And he said, and we'd gone through some of this, and he said, well, would you trust him?
Nixon was still very much alive, of course.
Would you trust him?
He said, I said, I'd trust him as president.
I never trust him as a friend.
I love that line.
He came rushing after me.
He said, can you stay another day?
We'd like to put you on the bill.
Really?
He came back the next day?
No, I said, no, I can't.
Now, how did I do Nixon?
Because Alice told me I had to.
Now, this gets back to where you started.
Since I got into the big one.
Well, that's really... You don't mention her in this book, right?
As soon as Alice is here, I don't know.
Yeah.
I did Nixon as Alice told me to.
You left your way.
You ready to tell you what to do?
That's the only time.
She said, you've got to do it.
What did she say?
Why?
Except because we've been talking, and she left the big shots at SNF, and there's no Nixon biography, and you're the perfect person to do it.
And I said, else I don't like it.
I want to spend, at that time, I thought, maybe five years with that son of a bitch.
And she said, Steve, where can you find a bigger champ?
And she caught me with that line.
And I just like her so much, and I admire her so much.
When I see her write, she's my audience.
I've now been through about 11 books for Alice.
Wow.
You're already answering your questions, actually.
She's your audience.
You're writing for Alice.
Yeah, because I know Alice so well, because
It used to be that my scripts would come back to me, and she just would have scribbling all over them.
And she taught me enormous about writing.
Stylistic?
Stylistic, word choice.
Really?
This is on the line editing?
On the line editing.
She's an absolute genius.
She is without question the best I've ever known.
By far.
Yeah, she's an almost impossible person to work with.
Imperious?
Oh, well, she's New York, and she's fast-tracked New York, and extraordinarily bright, and very opinionated, and terrifically good.
What she does... I'm going to use that quote, okay.
That's fine.
But she's also just, it's simply a secret.
I tell her this all the time.
I've got it in one.
It's impossible to work with.
She gets great assistance.
You go on, you get, I get the easy thing to work with me.
No, that'd be bad.
I love it because my man wins.
That's okay.
I'll look at it.
Anyway, I say in the intro that Liz Stein, who is her current assistant, she's had a lot.
I've been through about five of these assistants that she has, and it's the best job in publishing.
And they've gone on to, they've all gone on to great fame in Stockton, at the very top of the New York Publican world, at relatively young ages, after putting up with Alice for anywhere from two to five years max.
They even had a little club of the ex-Alice.
People would get together for a drink once in a while, and tell Alice stories.
Were you a mentor, do you think?
Well, for these young editors.
Oh, for those of you, oh, sure.
She doesn't do it consciously.
Just being around Alice puts them immediately right into the fastest track.
What was the first book you did with her, do you recall?
Eisenhower, the first volume of Eisenhower.
And how did that happen?
How did that come to pass?
Well, at that time, I had an agent, and I said, I'm going to do this bio-review of Eisenhower.
Do you recall where the agent was?
John Werth.
What's his name?
W-A-R-E.
John.
And...
John put it out for auction.
And Alice Bedias.
So I met with her.
I hadn't met her, and I had my first meeting with Alice, who was in New York.
I was on my way to London for whatever.
And we had a coffee together at a cafe, John and Alice and I. It was, I know it was a big advance.
It wasn't the biggest advance I got.
I don't need to know that anymore.
Yeah.
But anyway, I signed the contract sitting there, and then as I signed, I looked her in the eye, and I said, you didn't make a mistake.
And she looked me in the eye, and she said, I don't know.
Is that correct?
Yeah.
How old are you?
You're still a young man at this point.
Are you a young man?
No, not all that young anymore.
This was 1970s, I guess it must have been.
You're not young enough.
So I was...
40 years old.
Yeah, about 40.
How old is Alice?
How old are you now?
How old am I now?
It's because you tell me different years and you're different ages.
I'm 59 now.
I was born in January of 1936, so I'm almost 60.
So when this comes out in January, you'll be... I'll be 60.
So Alice is fun to talk about, and she can be
so blunt and so short with you, and she gets so goddamn mad, that I just try to avoid ever having to talk to her.
I just want to deal with your time right back.
I mean, somebody that line edits your manuscript, you get to know them awful well.
But mostly what I get to know is what works and what doesn't.
And she's just superb at that.
And she can pick out the superfluous paragraph or sentence or word that anybody
She never tries to tell me what to say.
She never, ever gets involved, and very, very occasionally she will ask me, don't you want to comment on this after a political scene?
And when Nixon did X, Y, or Z, or I did, don't you want to comment on this?
That happens once a book, maybe, maybe twice.
But she never argues with me on interpretation, and of course never on fact.
But the presentation of the research,
She's just wonderful.
Now, I knew enough to try to keep the narrative going forward, but she is just a bear on this.
Don't ever flash forward.
Don't ever flash back.
That's her philosophy, too.
She's the one that taught me that.
I think for all writing it's the rule, but absolutely it's the right, it's the rule for writing history.
And the tension just actually builds that way.
And Jesus, these, and flash forwards just kill it.
And flashbacks, as a matter of fact, are just an anchor on the narrative.
And it's a simple enough thing to say, it's awfully hard to, I mean, I still have to fight it if you want to flash ahead.
In a way, what she taught me about is to have faith in your reader.
That the reader is not... This is a book.
This isn't a magazine article or a newspaper article that you pick up and put down.
This is a book that's going to require a commitment on the reader's part of a lot of time.
And it's going to be there for a long time.
You're mindful of that, aren't you?
Oh, sure.
And you've got to trust your reader.
And she catches me on repetition sometimes, and you're driving this point too hard type of thing.
And if it's, if the story, if I've got a guy, I've got one here.
I'm working on the nurses and the doctors now in the European Theater of Operations.
actually lives right over in Bay St.
Louis, the 101st Airborne guy who got it in the neck of about an eighth of an inch of his spinal column, and was in, and I'm going to leave him right there.
It's a Christmas Day story.
And then I'm going to pick him up later, as time goes by.
And he had those goddamn Crutchfield tongs on, and had to lie without moving for six months.
It was a million dollar one.
But the temptation to tell the whole of Walter's story is very great.
But if you put it back where it belongs, it has a much bigger impact on the reader.
And if it's action stuff, of course, the narrative tends to build by itself, just by sticking to chronology.
Now, if you keep this in your head, you write this down.
I've got to get back to this guy.
Would you have little notes to yourself, or...?
I have notes all over the place to myself, yes, absolutely.
So you must outline fairly, to very detailed outlines.
You must know, you know if it's... No, I don't.
I don't work with outlines at all.
But I... These are one part of the interviews for the book I'm working on now.
And I go through this stuff so often that I can tell you immediately what Lieutenant Colonel Russell's got a good story on.
or I know exactly when I'm going to use Vanderburg.
These are all interviews you've done?
No, these are some interviews I've done, some oral history tapes that men send in, and some of them are written memoirs.
A lot of these guys would rather write.
How about, do you use researches, or do you do everything yourself?
Until the last few books I've done it all myself, now I have my son working for me.
That's great.
He spent four months in Germany.
Which one?
He's got German and doing interviews with German veterans.
Which one would give him his full name?
I like that one.
Hugh, H-U-G-H, Ambrose.
And so he did these four months of interviewing over there, about 250 interviews.
Wow.
And he is now just finishing the transcribing of them.
That's exciting.
Do you think it would always sound like that in a project?
Oh, yeah.
He's working.
And I'm getting a benefit out of it, a lot of benefit out of it.
But I, and Maura has often helped me.
Most of all, in the library in Abilene, where at various times we probably stayed for a year.
You mentioned that earlier.
Yeah.
I came to have great confidence in her ability to pick out the documents that I would want.
Your writing is so, and I mentioned this last night, it's just so beautifully readable.
I mean, you write, you engage the reader.
We went through this last night.
Did you ever read aloud?
Do you write also for that, for the second?
The first thing that happens, and it happened just this morning.
The first thing that happens.
You've printed it out, too, don't you?
I printed it.
I assume when I'm done.
I printed it, and then I can't wait to read it.
I just can't wait to read it.
And I find that reading aloud, it just takes me back to Alice for a minute.
When I'm writing, I've got Alice in mind, and what would she like to know?
She's got a very good eye for what works.
So I'm, what would Alex like to know next?
And will Alex like this story?
Or so on.
But my first immediate audience is myself and Morrow.
Because when I get done, we find the time, and then I'll read the chapter and on to them.
And I was able to hear myself and be in the audience.
And very often.
You kept all the awks.
You can't.
You can't read it.
You know, it's awkward.
I do the same thing.
And anyone who loves Shakespeare is going to read with rhythm.
You're going to be alert to the rhythms of the language and the things that just don't feel good popping off the tongue.
And I had that sense of reading as things as it reads.
Very quotable stuff.
I work very hard on that.
I appreciate the compliment a lot, because I really do work hard on that, and I am aware of
asking people who are going to read this to make an effort on their part, and I've got to make an effort to.
Sometimes I think what I do is I just read an enormous amount.
And then I pick out the very best stories.
And then, one of the services that I do is that.
The people that are interested in history, whether it's World War II or Lewis and Park or Civil War or whatever,
They don't have time to read all the documents I've got time to read, but I pick out the best of them and put a frame around them.
But I'm always aware when I'm writing of that, whether the image in my mind is sitting around the campfire and Alice is camped with us and she's on the other side or whatever, but wanting that tension always there for people waiting for just a little bit to find out what happens next.
So, when I do a chapter like this one, I thought about it and thought about it and thought about it, and I pretty much had it the way I wanted it in my mind before I started writing it.
I mean, you find a lot of surprises while you're writing, but definitely.
I knew where I was going to go, which is difficult with these chapters, because this is a section that's going to come in the middle, and it's not going to be narrative battles.
Instead is the theme chapters, replacements and how they got them in, medicine on the front, Christmas Day in 1944, and what it was like to be in a foxhole at night.
So these are, I don't have a chronology in these.
They're much harder to organize.
To think how you move from, how did you dig a foxhole, how did you eat in a foxhole,
Well, it sort of was very challenging.
Yeah, yeah.
But so while I'm doing that, and transitions, of course, are extremely difficult in a chapter like this.
I really work my ass off on transitions because Ike told me this once.
We were talking about a piece of writing, and he said, you can't change the subject that quickly.
If people need to have, and that's when I adopted a system that I've used ever since, is that
And just saying, read your transition.
I couldn't think of one.
We're going over to New Subject, and I couldn't think of a way to transition.
How do you indicate that on your copy?
Just a couple of spaces?
Yeah.
And I work really hard on transitions, because to get back to the lawyer.
I do have that.
Those readers in mind, and I want to make it, I want to give you the most information I can
And I don't want to say in a palatable way or an enjoyable way, but in a way that, and I love the word you use, in a way that flows.
There it is.
It's writing.
That's writing.
And then the writer.
Yeah.
And that's the writer in you, the storyteller in you.
You had mentioned, you alluded up, and I see copy here, but if you could just tell me, just tell me the book that you're working on now.
You can just give me an idea if you don't mind.
It's the campaign in Northwest Europe from dawn of June 7, 1944, to surrender on May 7, 1945.
Yeah, yeah.
And it's going to be like the D-Day work, how the high command operated and what the strategy was and so on, and then get down to how it was worked out on the ground.
Do you have a working cargo?
No, I'm toying with the Crusades.
But Alice will never take that.
That could be the kicker line, by the way, you know?
I always look for my story, I always look for my kicker.
Alice would never take it.
I've never had, she has picked the title for all my books.
She never takes me, she never will take my time.
I wanted to call the D-Day book,
This great undertaking, the great undertaking, which are the last words of Ike's Order of the Day, when he says, and they let us beseech Almighty God for his blessings on this great undertaking.
We'll see each of that.
This one, the Lewis one, I wanted to call.
of Courage Undaunted, marijuana Lewis Thomas Jackson in the opening of the American West, and Alice changed it to Undaunted Courage.
Of Courage Undaunted are Jackson's words, and Alice is the only editor in the whole world who would dare to edit Thomas Jackson.
It's my phrase, I won't use it.
Isn't that something?
You said last night, briefly, because you did leave, you were with Doubleday prior to... I was with Doubleday, and then I did a couple or three books of Doubleday.
See, John had been the editor.
I don't think you're going to want to use John Ware when you find out how this one turns out.
If you don't mind, I'll... Yeah, you're the reporter.
If this is off the record, tell me.
You're the reporter.
Right, right.
This is not off the record.
If it's on the tape, I'll feel free to use it unless you tell me otherwise.
Right, right, right.
And I'm having my worries.
I don't, you know... I take that for granted.
John was my editor at Doubleday.
And this is weird, every way I read, right there.
And then John quit Doubleday and set up as an agent.
And so he became my agent, and then he put the Eisenhower out.
That was the first book he did for me.
And he put it out on auction, and S&S out there, Doubleday, and some others.
So that's how I went over to S&S.
and they've been my publisher ever since.
But that's not bad.
I thought you were going to say something about John that wasn't... Oh, oh, well, no, eventually I fired him, because you'd ask about, do I have an agent now, and I don't.
I do my own.
I just decided that I know as much about it as these agents do, and that John really, and the 10% was just too much.
That's 15 now.
So I fired him.
I didn't fire him, I just stopped writing.
I started just doing the contracts myself.
Except that when it comes to foreign stuff like that, and paperbacks, doesn't that concern you a little bit?
And I guess you know how much of a bunch of others he does, right?
Yeah.
That's the answer.
So, he's the only agent you've ever had?
He's the only agent I've ever had.
And when you sold your first book to Doubleday, that was without an agent, or with an agent?
Yes, without.
That's the way the agent business is pretty easily disclosed.
Well, it is if you've got access to General Eisenhower, yeah.
We've done a lot, you know, so I'm... And how about after this next book?
The working title is The Crusade, like... I don't know.
I don't know.
I usually do, but...
That is, by this stage, if I'm writing a book, I know what the next book's going to be.
And this time, I don't.
I'm not worried about it, particularly.
I don't know that I'll ever undertake another major research-based book.
I think I've reached a point where I'm going to be doing more general stuff.
I don't know what I'm going to be doing.
Essays, maybe?
Maybe.
I can't tell you anything about this, man.
It was written for November, and these guys wanted me to do an autobiography.
That would be fun, wouldn't it?
I don't know.
I never tried it.
You said last night you were toying with a novel on the Lewis and Clarkson.
I did one.
I just didn't get it published.
Really?
Alice said, go back to writing what you do well.
Did you read it?
I hope so.
Do you remember the title of it?
It was, no, I didn't have a title.
It was The Daughter of George Shannon, who was the youngest member of George Shannon.
In a lot of ways, the most interesting.
But we don't know hardly anything about him.
Except that he became a great friend of Henry Clay.
He was in the Kentucky legislature, and then was a judge in Missouri.
Alice didn't want it.
I said, go back to writing.
But you wrote the whole thing.
That's a lot of work.
So, that's it?
That's your one of the standard fiction, right?
Yeah.
Did you like it yourself?
I thought... I talked to Bill O'Neill at Rutgers about it once, and while we were... He was doing one, too, at the same time.
And we just were telling each other, it's so fucking easy, you just make things up.
You don't have to prove anything.
You don't have to use any footnotes.
This is easiest writing.
Neither one of them got public.
How do you feel?
You know, we talked again last night, and I asked you about Jefferson getting on the floor with Lewis, and you said, hey, he wrote it.
If he didn't, if it's not written down, I don't do it.
And I don't want to talk about Joe McGinnis or anything like this, but let's just say this kind, this trend that we see where people assume the thoughts
presumed with lots of people.
I guess I'm asking... I think it's unconsciousable.
I think it's unconsciousable.
Just a general statement on the craft and what you see, you know.
Oh.
Things like that, and that's the same publishing house, too, so I'm not even asking you to, you know, look.
That was a major screw-up, that thing, McGinnis.
McGinnis is a friend of mine, I haven't seen him in years, and I kind of went on that, went in hiding after that thing as Molly Jenner.
That was terrible.
It was just unconscious.
And I don't understand why anybody reads it.
But of course, I guess that book wouldn't know that big a success.
Some of them are.
But you just can't do that.
I mean, you've got an obligation to protect the integrity of the past.
You don't have...
first of all, my absolute first rule of biography, and really of trying to deal with people in real life, it goes back to you so that I can trust you.
This first one comes from life.
I don't say it directly to any of us.
Never question another man's orders.
His wisdom?
Yes.
But don't question his own.
And I tried to live that way, and I tried to.
Dick Nixon was just the opposite.
Absolute opposite.
Always questioning the other man's mother and assigning to him the lowest possible.
But the rule of biography comes from Dr. Johnson.
And he says, we cannot look into the hearts of men, but their actions are open to observation.
And this business of McGinnis and others, I know what this guy was thinking.
Not only do they not know that, and they're guessing, and they're guessing at motive, but they
It's just not right.
It's wrong to do that.
And you've entered the realm of writing fiction now, and you ought to present it as fiction.
And it's the same problem that I'm going to be facing shortly.
I'm going to have to do some reviews of Oliver Stone's Nixon movie.
And if Oliver Stone wants to call this, if he wants to do it like Ken Warren did with you at all.
How did he change the name?
He changed the name.
That's fine.
I'm just going to go to enjoy it.
Or not.
That's right.
Goddammit, if he wants to say that this is history, then he's got certain obligations to that integrity of the past.
Like he did with the JFK.
Yeah.
Because it's dramatic, and you get these good actors, and people that we know about.
how valuable people are with what they see on the screen.
Yeah.
Anyway, I don't even want to get into that because this is a... Yeah, good.
Really, we got plenty of stuff here.
I got tons of stuff, you know.
Just tell me a little bit about Montana.
How long have you had a place out there?
Or I know that this is kind of a... Well, as you know, we got committed to Montana in 1976.
And we've been there every summer since, or at least some part of this summer.
And three kids live there, all three of them graduates from the university.
One of them with an MA from the university as well.
Two of them.
And three grandchildren live in there.
So, we'd just go up at every opportunity.
And when I retired in May, we bought a house up there, and we don't live half a year in Montana.
She's wonderful.
We live at the foot of a mountain.
In the morning, I walk the dogs up the mountain.
It's a 1,100-foot game.
It takes me an hour and a half, the top and back, and the dogs just love it.
It's a wonderful way to start the day.
You may live in there and just don't tell anybody.
That is off the record.
Montana is great.
Just great.
What is off the record now?
We don't want anybody.
We're there now.
We don't want anybody else coming in.
How about the tree very well on Lewis?
Because I didn't have a machine on when you told me that.
You have a tree out front.
Did you say about 500 years old?
500 years old, live oak, and they have a... Live oak is the name of the tree, right?
They have a society here.
Here in Bay St.
Louis?
Louis, and live oaks can
that are over 500 years old can be registered and they can go with a name tag and come here and I'll sell you one because this tree in behind is named William Clark.
Maybe I'm gonna shoot a couple pictures if you don't mind.
Maybe we'd shoot outside by one of those trees.
That's fine.
You know it stopped raining?
Registered Oak, William Clark, Bay Dash Waveland Garden Club, okay.
This is William Clark's tree.
This is Clark's tree right here.
This is out front.
That's a buffalo skull.
Wow.
Maura picked up on the Jefferson River.
Maybe we can shoot it in low water.
Laura should have been in a long time.
We were canoeing and went around the mud bank and she said, whoa!
Maybe the horn was sticking out.
Maybe we can shoot a...
I got tons of stuff here, you know, and you told me your phone number.
Yeah.
I'm going to go take a peek.
Okay.